[Amit Varma]: I had a bad dream the other day.
[Amit Varma]: I dreamed that I was unfit and extremely overweight.
[Amit Varma]: Now this doesn't sound like a dream because I am actually unfit and overweight.
[Amit Varma]: But in this dream, I actually went to the government for help.
[Amit Varma]: I went to the Ministry of Health, found a babu there, and said to him, help me, I am
[Amit Varma]: unfit, I am overweight, my clothes don't fit me, I pant with exhaustion every time I have
[Amit Varma]: to speak a long sentence like this one, pant, pant, help me, make me fit again, oh Ministry
[Amit Varma]: of Health.
[Amit Varma]: The babu replied, don't worry, we have plans to make you fit.
[Amit Varma]: We are setting up an SCZ for people like you.
[Amit Varma]: An SCZ, I said, what's an SCZ?
[Amit Varma]: He replied, an SCZ is a special exercise zone.
[Amit Varma]: We are setting up zones where people only exercise and do nothing else.
[Amit Varma]: Here, the nearest SCZ to you is a hundred kilometers from here, in a remote location
[Amit Varma]: where there is nothing else.
[Amit Varma]: Find it and get a workout.
[Amit Varma]: I want to see that bunch of yours disappear, just like your hard-earned money does, thanks
[Amit Varma]: to our taxation policies.
[Amit Varma]: Do you understand?
[Amit Varma]: I told him I understood.
[Amit Varma]: I found this SCZ, the special exercise zone in the boondocks, and I went there for a week.
[Amit Varma]: Then I took an annual membership and never went again.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioural
[Unknown]: science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Badma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: In today's episode, I'm going to be talking about SCZs or Special Economic Zones.
[Amit Varma]: SCZs are special areas set up by governments to attract investment by way of offering business-friendly
[Amit Varma]: regulations.
[Amit Varma]: This begs the question, why not have business-friendly regulation everywhere, if it's such a good
[Amit Varma]: thing?
[Amit Varma]: As it certainly is.
[Amit Varma]: SCZs have not just this conceptual flaw, but are also deeply flawed in the ways in which
[Amit Varma]: they are implemented in India.
[Amit Varma]: I chatted about this a few days ago with my friend Kartik Shashidhar, who has a chapter
[Amit Varma]: on this in his excellent book, Between the Buyer and the Seller.
[Amit Varma]: Between the Buyer and the Seller is out now on Amazon and I highly recommend it.
[Amit Varma]: For now, let's talk about SCZs.
[Amit Varma]: Kartik, welcome to the show.
[Guest]: Hi Amit.
[Amit Varma]: Glad to be back here.
[Amit Varma]: So Kartik, in your book, the very first chapter is a fascinating chapter, which juxtaposes
[Amit Varma]: two company shutdowns, which kind of happened at the same time, which is towards the end
[Amit Varma]: of 2014, a Nokia plant shut down in Sriparambudur and it was placed in an SCZ there, a Special
[Amit Varma]: Economic Zone.
[Amit Varma]: At the same time, Yahoo shut down its India operations and laid off tons of people in
[Amit Varma]: Bangalore.
[Amit Varma]: And the interesting thing you point out in the book is that while most of the people
[Amit Varma]: laid off by Yahoo managed to find other jobs and employment and weren't affected so badly,
[Amit Varma]: the people who were laid off by Nokia and Sriparambudur, on the other hand, could not
[Amit Varma]: find equivalent jobs and many of them either had to settle for much lower paying jobs or
[Amit Varma]: they had to migrate to towns.
[Amit Varma]: So why the difference in outcomes?
[Guest]: Yeah, so there was a great story in Mint, by the way, a few days after this happened,
[Guest]: which spoke about what happened to the guys who were working for Nokia in the Sriparambudur
[Guest]: plant.
[Guest]: I mean, like as an addition reading, it would be great to just look at what happens if you
[Guest]: are working in a plant in a remote area where there are no other comparable employment opportunities
[Guest]: and what happens if the plant needs to shut down.
[Guest]: So it's a great read, I can put the link as part of the podcast.
[Guest]: So I think the big difference was in the terms of the location.
[Guest]: So at the time when the Nokia plant shut down, there were two places in India where mobile
[Guest]: phones were being manufactured.
[Guest]: There was this particular Yahoo plant in Sriparambudur, which is in an SEC.
[Guest]: And at the same time, Micromax was setting up a manufacturing facility in Rudraprayag
[Guest]: in Uttaranchal, where again, they had received, I think, some favorable tax treatment and
[Amit Varma]: so on.
[Amit Varma]: So it was like an SEC here.
[Guest]: It was like an SEC, more or less.
[Guest]: And so you had two plants at two opposite ends of the country making a similar thing.
[Guest]: And making mobile phones, I mean, yeah, while it's manufacturing and all that, it's a fairly
[Guest]: specialized operation.
[Guest]: So like, I mean, and both of these are like, out of the way, I mean, Sriparambudur is still
[Guest]: not Chennai.
[Guest]: So it's still a bit of an out of the way place.
[Guest]: So it's a bit of a hard to recruit employees when you set up in such places.
[Guest]: I mean, like, I mean, you might get great tax breaks, and the monetary value of the
[Guest]: tax breaks might typically be more than what you would, the premium you would have to pay
[Guest]: to get employees in these places.
[Guest]: And but what happens is that it creates enormous risk for the employees.
[Guest]: Because if, in case you shut down, and I mean, like, birth and death of businesses is a part
[Guest]: of everyday life now.
[Guest]: So it's like, it always has been, in case you shut down, you want your employees to
[Guest]: have alternate employment opportunities.
[Guest]: And if you are an employee looking for a job, you want to kind of hedge against your company
[Guest]: going down, and you want to make sure your life doesn't get affected too much, and so
[Guest]: on.
[Guest]: So if you're in an SEV, where you're working for a company with no similar other companies
[Guest]: there, it's a very fragile environment to work in.
[Guest]: So what, on the other hand, Yahoo, Yahoo also I think was in, some of the offices were in,
[Guest]: in what can be classified as SEVs, they were export promotion parks in Bangalore.
[Guest]: But the important thing is that they were all in Bangalore, which is a large city, which
[Guest]: is the hub of the IT industry in Bangalore.
[Guest]: So what you saw after Yahoo decided to close its operations in India, was that you actually
[Guest]: had companies setting up dedicated portals to hire these ex-Yahoo engineers, because
[Guest]: they knew that Yahoo employed a lot of fairly good people.
[Guest]: And there were now a large number of good people out in the market.
[Guest]: So and this was a time when generally, growth was good, the startup industry was booming.
[Guest]: So people wanted to recruit good engineers.
[Guest]: So and so and most of them managed to get jobs fairly quickly enough, and without really
[Guest]: disrupting their lives, because Bangalore has a very liquid job market for IT professionals.
[Amit Varma]: So let me move to a more fundamental question now, you know, which is cities really.
[Amit Varma]: And cities are often demonized and people talk about the low quality of life in cities,
[Amit Varma]: the urban squalor, the congestion, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: But yet, the history of humanity is really a history of migration from rural areas to
[Amit Varma]: cities from less crowded areas to more crowded areas.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, by the year 2045, 70% of the world will live in cities, it's just a continuing
[Amit Varma]: process.
[Amit Varma]: So people don't have to go to cities, very few people move the other way, unless they're
[Amit Varma]: very rich, and they buy a farmhouse and so on.
[Amit Varma]: But that's the life of the extremely privileged.
[Amit Varma]: So what accounts for this movement to cities?
[Amit Varma]: What is the attraction?
[Guest]: So the attraction of cities is that like, I mean, it's many fold.
[Guest]: But basically, it is that because you are living so close to so many more people in
[Guest]: a city, there's so much more you can do, there's so much more choice in terms of what you can
[Guest]: do, there's so many more professions you can pursue in a city compared to what you can
[Guest]: pursue in a small rural area.
[Guest]: So I think what, and also like, if you kind of choose the right city based on your skill
[Guest]: sets, what will also happen is that you will have a wide range of choice of employment
[Guest]: in terms of where to work, who to work for, who to work with, and so on.
[Guest]: So that kind of is a huge plus for cities compared to like, smaller areas, because your
[Guest]: life is not fragile to the fortunes of one employer anymore, because there's plenty of
[Amit Varma]: options for what you want to do.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So effectively, it's network effects, like companies like to go to cities and businesses
[Amit Varma]: like to go to cities, because there are many more people they can employ there.
[Amit Varma]: And also individuals like to go to cities, because there are many more opportunities,
[Amit Varma]: not just job opportunities, but much bigger, social and economic networks.
[Amit Varma]: And as all trade is a positive something, you benefit the most by being in a place where
[Amit Varma]: you have more options and more people to essentially trade with.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: So it's basically simple network effects, because in a city, because the market is so
[Guest]: large for anything that you want to do, like there are so many more services that get traded
[Guest]: in cities compared to rural areas.
[Guest]: So in another chapter in the book, I talk about the restaurant industry and talk about
[Guest]: how like cities can afford to have restaurants because there are so many people and like,
[Guest]: so each restaurant can assume a particular market every day.
[Guest]: But if you're in a rural area, where there's a small number of people living there, and
[Guest]: nobody wants to eat in the same place every day, unless that place is home, the option
[Guest]: to have a restaurant market is so much smaller.
[Guest]: So in that sense, it's like for any kind of market, be it employment, be it for things
[Guest]: you want to enjoy or something, I mean, like best done in cities where there's a tremendous
[Guest]: scale and there's far more stuff that is traded.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, that's why if you go to an Indian village, you'll never find an Italian restaurant
[Amit Varma]: or a sushi bar there, because there simply aren't enough customers.
[Amit Varma]: But while those are very niche tastes, in a city, you can cater to those niches profitably
[Amit Varma]: because you have that kind of scale.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, first of all, if you go to an Indian village, finding a restaurant itself
[Guest]: is like, I mean, larger kind of village, it's hard, I mean, it doesn't make economic sense
[Guest]: to run a restaurant in a village unless you're on a highway or something.
[Guest]: And as for sushi bars or something, that again, like you need a really large city like Mumbai
[Guest]: or Bangalore for it to work because like, it's so niche that you need a really big population
[Guest]: in your catchment area for it to be like, commercially viable.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: Like in another context, you've written in your book, there's a chapter where you write
[Amit Varma]: about feta cheese in Bangalore.
[Amit Varma]: And while you know, feta cheese is available in very few places in Bangalore and Mumbai,
[Amit Varma]: like Nature's Basket, for example, it will be available in some places at a cost for
[Amit Varma]: those who want to pay that price and many do, I love feta cheese.
[Amit Varma]: And you will never ever, you know, be able to find feta cheese in a small town in India,
[Amit Varma]: for example, at least not now.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, cities afford the kind of specialization and division of labor, which makes it profitable
[Amit Varma]: for individuals to go there.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, when Yahoo shut down in Bangalore, even if some of their operations might have
[Amit Varma]: been in an SEZ in Bangalore, just by dint of that location, those people were able to
[Amit Varma]: find jobs because they were already in that relatively liquid market, while the market
[Amit Varma]: in Sriparambudur was very illiquid.
[Amit Varma]: There was it was an SEZ, there was one company there, and those guys simply couldn't find
[Amit Varma]: any other jobs.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, SEZs normally have many companies, but in this particular SEZ, they had one mobile
[Guest]: manufacturing company.
[Guest]: And there was no other company which was similar to this company.
[Guest]: So what happened was that like, I mean, so when you are working in a place where there's
[Guest]: one company of a particular type, and you lose your job for whatever reason, right,
[Guest]: whether the company shuts down or you fight with your boss, or whatever happens, if you
[Guest]: lose your job, you have nowhere to go, you need to necessarily relocate.
[Guest]: So you're kind of, so your life is necessarily kind of fragile, because it's kind of tied
[Guest]: to a particular employer and so on.
[Guest]: On the other hand, if you're in a place where there is plenty of choice for employment,
[Guest]: and then it's good both for you and for your employer, because let's say, for example,
[Guest]: I'm like the head of engineering at a company located in some way, which has its office
[Guest]: in some village, right?
[Guest]: And I decide to leave someday, now, my employer will have a massive task to find another head
[Guest]: of engineering to replace me.
[Guest]: But if I were the head of engineering in a place in Bangalore, and I left it and because
[Guest]: the market for engineers in Bangalore is liquid, it will hardly, the company is so much better
[Guest]: of being there, because it's very easy for them to replace me.
[Guest]: So it works on both sides, both for the employer and for the employee, it works to be in a
[Guest]: big city, because there's more choice for both.
[Guest]: And so like, the amount of risk they have to face is like significantly lower.
[Amit Varma]: And that means a higher real estate costs completely worth it.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, it's a no brainer, because the benefits are far more than the costs.
[Guest]: Yeah, no, I mean, like, so people keep talking about how real estate in cities cost really
[Guest]: high.
[Guest]: I know you've done a few, few great episodes on this podcast on real estate, I guess it's
[Guest]: best to put links to those.
[Guest]: But a lot of cases, apart from in cases where supply has been artificially constrained for
[Guest]: whatever reason, like, I mean, the high real estate cost you pay, either in terms of like
[Guest]: the rent you pay, or in the small size of the dwellings, or in terms of the quality
[Guest]: of accommodation, it's a price that people are willing to pay, because the value they
[Guest]: get from being in a city is so much more.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, it actually illustrates how much value there is, because supply constraints
[Amit Varma]: to things like FSI and rent control.
[Amit Varma]: And we've got previous episodes of the scene in the unseen, and that prices are much higher
[Amit Varma]: than they should be.
[Amit Varma]: But regardless of that, people would prefer to be in cities and in smaller places.
[Amit Varma]: So coming to sort of the question of SEZs in particular, now, special economic zones
[Amit Varma]: or SEZs are often glorified by some people, because they said that, look, the scene effect
[Amit Varma]: of that is that you create a zone, which has lesser regulation than you have otherwise
[Amit Varma]: in cities.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, you make it attractive for businesses to set up there.
[Amit Varma]: And once they set up there, they generate employment and revenue, and it kind of helps
[Amit Varma]: everyone.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, that's begging the question about why those regulations aren't removed
[Amit Varma]: everywhere instead of just in SEZs.
[Amit Varma]: But taking that for granted that they're going to remain the way they are, that is what many
[Amit Varma]: people call the scene effect of SEZs.
[Amit Varma]: And according to you, one unseen effect of having SEZs in places like Sriparambudur or
[Amit Varma]: far far off areas is that you are not plugged into the network of a city.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, the cost of business is actually much higher in SEZs.
[Guest]: Yeah, so I mean, you were talking about generating employment, right?
[Guest]: I mean, yeah, they do generate employment, if you set up a plant anywhere, you obviously
[Guest]: need people to generate employment.
[Guest]: But when you have set it up in a place where it's very fragile employment, I mean, like,
[Guest]: it's very, you don't want to kind of tie your entire career and your life decisions to kind
[Guest]: of the fortunes of one company, which is set up a new plant in a particular place, right?
[Guest]: I mean, if the real motive is to generate employment, you need to kind of, you want
[Guest]: to generate employment that's more stable, that's more like kind of, and I mean, you
[Guest]: can't force companies to not shut down and so on.
[Guest]: But what you want is to kind of generate employment, which can give some kind of stability where
[Guest]: the employee is hedged against something happening in the job and so on.
[Guest]: Here, you generate employment, but it's very unstable employment, because from what the
[Guest]: Yahoo thing forces.
[Guest]: And yes, there's no network in the city.
[Guest]: So it's a very weird life that I personally haven't lived in a SEZ, so I can't really
[Guest]: comment.
[Guest]: The only sense from what I read is that it's a very kind of a weird life there.
[Guest]: So you probably create much more value, if all these people were to kind of, rather than
[Guest]: working in a SEZ, if they were to work in a big town or city, there will probably be
[Guest]: much more value being created, because there will be so many more things that are credible
[Guest]: there and like people are kind of creating much more value.
[Amit Varma]: So would you recommend that when people set up SEZs, they should set it up only in big
[Amit Varma]: cities or would you go a step further and say that we need to re-look entirely at the
[Amit Varma]: concept of SEZs to begin with?
[Guest]: I think we need to re-look entirely at the concept of SEZs, because what happens is when
[Guest]: you try to give certain kind of, by the way, the Nokia closure again, it had to do with
[Guest]: the terms of the SEZ in which they were located.
[Guest]: So I think, so when Nokia sold its manufacturing business to Microsoft back in 2014, they didn't
[Guest]: sell the Shri Perumal Dur plant because there was a litigation going on, because I think
[Guest]: there were some clauses in the SEZ saying, you can be here and get these benefits, if
[Guest]: and only if you export everything you make and it was not clear whether they were exporting
[Guest]: all the phones or if they were selling some phones in India, which is a completely mindless
[Guest]: regulation.
[Guest]: But because of that, that plant didn't get sold to Microsoft.
[Guest]: It might have, if those, if it was not because of, if the plant had not, let's say the plant
[Guest]: was still in Shri Perumal Dur, there was no other mobile manufacturing unit in India.
[Guest]: So let's say for some good reason, they would have chosen to put it in Shri Perumal Dur,
[Guest]: which is still in a big manufacturing belt in Tamil Nadu.
[Guest]: I think we have a good friend who runs a factory there.
[Guest]: So there, like what would have happened is that it would have probably been sold to Microsoft
[Guest]: and had Microsoft bought the plant, there would have been so many other ways in which
[Guest]: they might have put it to good use.
[Guest]: Maybe if they didn't want to make mobile phones, they would have used it to make keyboards
[Guest]: or whatever.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: But because it was in an SEG, because it was set up with certain conditions, the whole
[Guest]: idea of the SEG is that you need to follow a certain list of conditions in order to qualify
[Guest]: for certain benefits and so on.
[Guest]: It kind of restricts the kind of activity that you can do.
[Guest]: So it's not only that, like there's not so much choice for employees and the company
[Guest]: in terms of recruiting people, finding jobs and so on.
[Guest]: It's also too restrictive in terms of what you can do.
[Guest]: It's almost back to the License Raj era where you had to take permission from the government
[Guest]: to manufacture a certain number of units of something and you couldn't make one more than
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: Here it's just that you can manufacture certain kinds of things and you can't make anything
[Guest]: else.
[Guest]: So it's a very, very counterproductive regulation.
[Guest]: But because it produces certain incentives, a lot of companies kind of end up taking those
[Amit Varma]: incentives for short term benefits.
[Amit Varma]: So out of these two options, which I'm just thinking of the top of my head, out of these
[Amit Varma]: two options, which make more sense to you?
[Amit Varma]: One is that you keep SEGs, but you redesign the incentives in such a way that you don't
[Amit Varma]: have all these crazy cumbersome regulations and you keep them near cities or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And the second is that you do away with SEGs altogether because of the logic is that less
[Amit Varma]: regulation or better conditions will attract more businesses.
[Amit Varma]: Since that is a positive sum game, just spread it out everywhere, offer it to everyone.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, everyone benefits from that, right?
[Guest]: So which seems more...
[Guest]: It's very clear to me that the second one is a better option because the first one involves
[Guest]: too much design.
[Guest]: It involves too much intelligence on part of the designer, regulator who comes up with
[Guest]: these rules and so on.
[Guest]: So if you kind of... and there's a very high chance of it kind of going wrong.
[Guest]: So in that sense, it's okay if we are slow to move on labor reforms or whatever.
[Guest]: It's okay.
[Guest]: Because I think in the long run, I think what SEGs create is that they give you short-term
[Guest]: benefits in terms of tax benefits or freedom for a few years from certain labor regulations
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: And companies are very happy to bite on those short-run benefits and they end up locating
[Guest]: there.
[Guest]: But it creates long-term problems.
[Guest]: It doesn't result in kind of sustainable long-term growth, it doesn't result in sustainable long-term
[Guest]: improvement in regulation and all, it's a kind of a band-aid that you kind of put on
[Guest]: a deep cut.
[Guest]: So you're better off kind of not having SEGs at all and yeah, in the short run, less jobs
[Guest]: might end up being created.
[Guest]: But I think it's a more sustainable solution and you'll also see that the mainstream regulation
[Guest]: is easier to change when everybody's part of it and so on.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and this seems to go back, I think, to the central question of trying to centrally
[Amit Varma]: plan an economy.
[Amit Varma]: Like an SEG seems to me to be a sort of a jugaad done by a central planner, while that
[Amit Varma]: should really not be the case, while cities arise organically from supply and demand and
[Amit Varma]: network effects and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So the ideal role for governments, since they can never possibly have all the information
[Amit Varma]: available to them to run a market as, you know, Hayek explicated so brilliantly 80 years
[Amit Varma]: ago, is that just to take a hands-off approach and let things develop organically.
[Amit Varma]: Karthik, thanks so much for coming on the show.
[Amit Varma]: I learned a lot from reading your book, and I've learned a lot from this episode as well.
[Guest]: Thanks so much, bye.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the show, I guarantee that you will also enjoy reading Karthik's
[Amit Varma]: book, Between the Buyer and the Seller.
[Amit Varma]: Hop over to Amazon and pick it up.
[Amit Varma]: You can check out the archives of this podcast, The Seen and the Unseen, at seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Karthik on Twitter at Karthiks, K-A-R-T-H-I-K-S, and you can follow me at
[Amit Varma]: Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks for listening.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to The Seen and the Unseen, check out another great show by IVM
[Amit Varma]: Podcasts, Made in India, hosted by my friend May Thomas, where every week she profiles
[Amit Varma]: up-and-coming independent Indian bands.
[Unknown]: Excuse me, bhaiya, excuse me.
[Unknown]: Bole, madam.
[Unknown]: Menu mein kya hai?
[Unknown]: Menu mein Seen Unseen hai, Podcast hai, On Course hai, Cyrus Says hai, Made in India,
[Unknown]: Rediscovery Project, Empowering Series, Sex Wax hai, IVM Likes hai, Simplified hai, Keeping
[Unknown]: It Queer hai, Tings and Destinations hai, My Neighbour Zuckerberg hai, aur The Fan Garage
[Unknown]: hai.
[Unknown]: Aapko kya chahiye hai?
[Unknown]: Ek baar repeat kar denge kya?
[Unknown]: Repeat abit nahi karta hum.
[Unknown]: Aap jao ivmpodcast.com pe aur suno yeh sab, ya phir download karo unka app, sab aapki
[Unknown]: kumbliyon pe.